Janice getting,
hi, I'm doing a morning tea, right,
team, do you want something?
Um, no thank you.
Very kind of you, but no thank you.
Okay. Alright.
Welcome everybody. To the health committee.
We have our first hearing today from Mcma Holder Association
of Sari Medical Specialists,
Dr.
Katie, Ben, and Sarah Dalton. Be joining us presently.
Welcome to the Health Committee. I'm Sam Dale.
You'll see members around the table.
Uh, great to have you here.
And listen, we have you for 10 minutes.
You may use that time as you wish.
If you want to leave us time for questions, you may.
I'll hand that to you now. Kia.
Kia, Sam, uh, thank you. Course. Dalton ua.
Um, I'm a day job.
I'm an S in Nelson,
and I'm here, um, represent all my colleagues
and vice president of the Association
of S Medical Specialist.
Yeah, so, um, I'm executive director of A SMS.
We are the union for senior doctors and dentists.
We have more than 6,200 members
who work mostly in hospitals,
but some in community settings all over New Zealand.
Look, we, um, will take our submission as read
and we have four key points
that we want to make this morning.
Um, I'm gonna cover a couple.
Katie will cover a couple, uh, primarily clause 11, um,
Which we believe, uh, is gonna have the effect of attempting
to silence doctors and other health
workers from speaking out.
Um, the Public Service Act 2020 already covers,
uh, those sorts of speaking out
and political neutrality issues.
And we believe more effectively
and with more nuance than is proposed in clause 11.
We think Clause 11 is unhelpful and confusing, partly
because of the existing legislation.
Um, and without explaining it's atte, uh,
its real intention.
Um, it is incredibly important
and in fact, a requirement on senior doctors holding an a
PC, an annual practicing certificate, uh,
to have a primary responsibility to the patients
that they treat and to, to also speak up on issues
of patient safety.
So, um, we believe that the intent of this clause is at odds
with other regulation that is very important.
Um, our Constitution, uh, also talks about
speaking up on issues of patient safety and of, uh, issues
and debates of significance around public health.
So our members are tasked both as holders of APCs
and as members of our union to speak up for those issues.
Um, we have already faced, um, examples where doctors
who have commented on patient safety, for example,
not being able to access care in a timely fashion due
to resource constraints.
And this being framed by the employer
or others as doctors making, um, political, uh, comments.
They, they, I guess they're political in the sense
that health is fundamentally political
and access to healthcare is fundamentally political,
but it is a very different situation from a chief executive
or senior policy person giving advice to, to ministers,
uh, or to the government.
Um, so we believe that the inclusion of Section 11, uh,
would remove a critical layer of protection for patients.
And as I've already said, run counter
to the ethical standards
and professional standards that require doctors
and dentists to place patients first and foremost.
Um, and I just want to note that we fully support the, uh,
NPS, the Medical Protection Society's analysis in
their written submission.
Um, I'm gonna hand across to Katie now.
So, um, many of you might be aware
of the mid staff chair inquiry in the uk, which is,
as you might be able to tell, where I'm from.
I actually left the UK to come to New Zealand looking
for a functioning health system,
and I'm quite disappointed that it seems
to be being dismantled in front of my eyes.
The problem with mid staffer chair, uh,
when you look at the report, there are some key themes
that come through inadequately trained staff
who are too few in numbers and not enough staff
and working, um, at the top
or over the level of their scope.
The junior doctors who are left alone without backup,
without senior decision making support, um, staff
who speak out are feeling ignored.
There is evidence that many are deterred from speaking out
because there is a culture.
There was at mid stats, a culture of fear and bullying.
Now that hospital had many more patient deaths than you
would've expected of a hospital of its size.
It sparked a national inquiry, um, hit the headlines
and you can see those things beginning
to emerge in hospitals across New Zealand.
From speaking to my colleagues, when we meet up, um,
I'm a member of a lot of other subspecialty committees
and from speaking to my colleagues when we meet up,
these themes are echoed across the country.
Now, this bill
and particularly, um, clause 11, this bill is not going
to help with stopping that sort of culture.
This bill is going to enable that to flourish
and continue to the detriment of patients.
Particularly there is a focus
or there was a focus on the financial side for med staff.
There was a focus on saving money in a service
that was already underperforming.
There was a focus on targets rather than outcome-based
performance measures, and there was no transparency
and just mentioning that focus on funding
rather than in a service that's already failing.
My own hospital of Nelson, as I'm sure you will aware,
has um, been in the news recently.
We have had our funding increase this year by $22 million,
which is lovely, except we've had our saving target
of $43 million.
So that's an effective funding cut.
So in a hospital, which we can demonstrate is already not
performing, is understaffed, under-resourced,
and where patients are having
to wait too long, full timely care.
So this bill, the way it is phrased, is not going to fix any
of those problems, but will enable them to keep going.
I'm gonna hand back to Sal.
So we believe this bill will entrench a system that fails
to deliver for Maori.
Um, we are really concerned about that.
Evidence shows that Maori life expectancy is seven years
shorter than for non Maori.
And that Maori experience poorer access to health services,
poorer quality services and greater treatment delays.
Uh, the health and disability system review
found Maori experience, racism
and discrimination that impact health outcomes.
Um, that review recommended reforms to improve
how the system, uh, performs for Maori.
The amendments proposed in this bill roll back
positive changes that were intended to improve the system,
to make it less racist, more inclusive,
and to ensure that equitable access to care
and outcomes from receiving that care were in place
for all New Zealanders.
So, um, the removal of the health sector principles,
the removal of requirements for understanding Titi
and Tikanga at board level
and within senior levels
of health New Zealand are a major concern.
We're also concerned that consultation
with Iwi Maori partnership boards did not take place
during the drafting of this bill.
Uh, and that it would appear that the role
of Iwi Maori partnership boards is being downgraded, uh,
under the proposed amendments.
Um, A SMS amended our own constitution a couple of years ago
to recognize TE and MATO Maori.
Uh, we remain committed to trying to do better to, um,
on our journey to work towards a truly equitable, um,
health system and one
that is founded against the founding principles
of our country, including
And picking up on that.
Um, section seven
removes a lot of the protections that, um,
our public health service provide for us.
So a lot of the problems in health, um,
stem from public health measures like smoking, like um,
housing, like poverty, like access to healthy foods,
and the health sector principles which this bill seeks
to repeal, um, outline the role
of the government in allowing our population access
to decent housing, to decent food.
Um, the removal of the requirement
for an expert advisory committee on public health, um,
is really concerning, particularly when you think we're,
you know, potentially one more year away
from another major pandemic.
We dunno what's out there.
The health system is under massive amounts of pressure,
and the more we stifle the principles related
to the social determinants of health,
which would be the poverty, the housing,
and the access to decent food
and education, the more we remove those layers
of protection, the more we are gonna place stress on our
health system for our kids that are growing up.
Now I also, um,
briefly wanna touch on my other major concern within the
bill, which is the embedding in
legislation of health targets.
Because targets it,
something you can measure is something you can gain.
Um, again, using Nelson as an example, I've seen that
where we created ghost clinics so that we had patients
that could come through the system and seem
to have an outpatient appointment
where it clearly was not an appropriate way.
It's not a, it wasn't a clinic.
The people who were meant to be
running it weren't even there.
Health targets create an incentive to gain the system.
And if you look at the, um, thresholds for treatments,
I looked at this particularly when I was doing some
bioethical research, when I looked at the thresholds
for treatment, they changed year on year depending on
what the, um, hospital could provide for that year.
So in some parts of the country,
if the hospital was resourced,
the threshold for treatment was lower.
In other parts of the country where they were more, um,
understaffed, the thresholds
of treatment was significantly higher.
And you can see those thresholds fluctuate over a five
to 10 year period based on the ability of the hospital
to provide those services.
We are not putting people on waiting lists
because we know we can't treat them
within the four month timeframe.
We are not putting, gps aren't referring people to hospital
because they know they're going to get refused.
So embedding targets in legislation just makes it longer
for patients to receive healthcare.
And somebody who has a diagnosis of terminal cancer
who is referred to palliative care within treatment target
timeframes, will be treated as a positive outcome.
The fact that they have to be palliated
because their diagnosis wasn't picked up enough
with enough time for it to be treated,
that's not a positive outcome, but it's marked as such.
So you have to look at what are you measuring?
Are we measuring life expectancy?
Are we measuring prognosis?
Are we measuring healthy life for our patients
or are we just trying to make our numbers
Look better? I'm gonna
have to jump in there. We're over time. Sure.
Apologies. I'm sorry because I know we had questions,
but, um, we we're over, over 10 and a half minutes, um,
and we've got a lot to get through,
but thank you for your detailed submission
presentation to the committee today.
Got it.
Okay. Next up
we have, uh, APEX and the N-Z-R-D-A
UA members.
Welcome. Uh, you must be Natalia,
very good to have you here.
Um, we have you here for 10 minutes this morning.
Uh, you may use that time as you wish.
If you want to leave us time for
questions, of course, you may.
Uh, I'll hand that time to you now. Thank you.
Uh, look, thank you for the opportunity
to speak today on behalf
of the Resident Doctors Association in Apex Union.
So we represent over 3000 resident doctors in over 5,500
Allied Scientific and technical employees across the motu.
And, um, we'll take our submission as read,
but again, focus on just three key aspects in our
presentation today.
First, the repeal of tega, the New Zealand Health Charter.
This bill says that it's about cutting red tape,
but we believe that's misleading.
The charter isn't a pointless bureaucratic document.
It's a common sense agreement on how all health workers
should be treated while they're at work.
Um, it was jointly developed through employer worker
and union involvement.
And it says very basic fundamental things like everyone
deserves to be treated with respect at work
that workplaces should be safe.
Um, it's been said about the charter
that it isn't about patients, and that's true
because that's not the primary purpose of the document.
It's meant to be read
and implemented alongside other patient-centered documents.
So, for example, the Code of Health
and Disability Services, consumer rights, uh, supported
and respected health worker is going to provide much better
and much safer care.
You can't put patients first if you treat the people
who care for them as dispensable and their rights
and protections at work as optional.
And repealing this framework
that has had buy-in from both the employer
and workers will do absolutely nothing
to advance patient interests.
Second, we strongly pause extending requirements
for health workers to be politically neutral.
This is too blunt and dangerous an approach,
and we question its real purpose.
It seems to serve no other purpose than to silence experts.
As we well know, political decisions can create system-wide
problems that only those on the frontline can see.
And this clause would make it harder for them
to sound the alarm, which would be a huge step backward
for patient safety.
Safety. The primary duty of health professionals is
to their patient and if they see something in the system
that puts their patients at risk, they have a ethical
and often a professional duty to speak out.
And this is what putting patients first
would truly look like.
Finally, we are concerned
that this bill is being sold under the guise
of putting patients first,
but it's been developed without engaging those most affected
patients and practitioners.
It shows a fundamental misunderstanding of
how our health system works.
You can't put patients first
by devaluing the very people who care for them.
And these changes will be taking a huge step backward
and ultimately harm patient care.
We urge the committee to listen
to the people on the front lines
and stop this bill from moving forward.
Thank you, and happy to take questions. Oh, wonderful.
Thank you Natalia.
Um, it's very seldom that we get
such a long period to ask questions.
We've got seven minutes if members
have anything I should be on.
Um, thank you very much for your presentation.
Uh, one of the, uh, ways in which the charter has been used
has been to point to a set of institutional
or health system values.
When there are instances of bullying in the workplace, uh,
are you able to describe how for junior doctors workplace
bullying is a barrier to their training and to patient care?
Absolutely. And as a side note,
I feel particularly qualified to talk on this.
I've done my PhD in workplace bullying and health.
Um, so just coming back to the fact that there's sort
of two things to consider with workplace bullying.
Um, first of all, it harms patient care because doctors
and other caregivers,
so any health professional we're talking about here
obviously goes through incredible amounts of distress.
Their, um, physically distressed, mentally distressed.
And that itself can impact things like concentration.
It can impact how careful they are with, um,
carrying up procedures and things like checking errors
and mistakes and that risks patient safety.
But of course there's a bigger, um, thing usually happening
with workplace bullying because when an organization allows
bullying to flourish, um,
and to happen, what we are really seeing is a really
poor reporting culture.
So oftentimes it's not just one person being bullied,
it's not often just one resident doctor.
It's a pattern that's been happening for a while.
Other people, other staff members that, um, are often aware
of this, they're also affected.
And what they learn over time
through perhaps having raised things,
but it going nowhere, is
that this is not a safe place to speak up.
Um, I won't be heard here
and nothing will be done about my concerns.
And you can easily imagine how if that's happening
with workplace bullying, that can also,
and often is extended
to things like patient safety and care.
So for instance, um, if they see shortcuts happening,
if they see things that are putting patient safety
and patient care at risk, um, again, we see a suppression of
that reporting and there's um, there's sort
of systematic reviews
and meta analysis showing the link between bullying
and poor patient outcomes as well.
Thank you Ana
Kra, thank you for your submission.
Um, I've got a bit of a two part, um, conversation
that I'd like to invite with you.
Um, first of all is around, um, speaking
with some in the workforce where they felt like the repeal
of ol uh, was a kick in the guts for the works
that the health sector
and workforce had put into developing, uh,
the New Zealand Health Charter.
Um, that it was, um, a guiding light for organizations
and entities in terms of how to treat your staff.
So that's one thing in terms
of the feeling from the workforce.
Um, but that in the removal of that,
and then also, uh, now where we see the, uh,
independent auditing of our New Zealand health plan
and we've had the Auditor General's comments, um, around,
um, the strategy that's just come out.
Um, there's, do you think that there is enough monitoring,
um, that will take place in the system with the removal
of these things from, uh, where they were entrenched before
and we had these strategies, um, guiding, uh, the way
with which organizations and entities should behave?
Question?
Yes. Thank you. Look there.
Um, and I'll answer that perhaps in two parts.
So first off, if we just look at the broader context
of what's been happening in terms
of the employment landscape, if we look at the repeals
to worker protections we've seen in the last year and a bit,
and that will likely come into effect
by the end of the year.
Um, if we look at it from that perspective,
there's very little else apart from the health charter
to really hold employers in the health sector accountable
for keeping their workers safe
and supporting their workers while they're at work.
And, um, I'll just sort of reiterate that this is, um,
applying to all he health entities,
not just Health New Zealand.
Um, and so in terms of that, there's very little else, um,
to hold employers to account.
There's, there's, you know, often suites of policies
for workers and there's codes of conduct
and professional codes that they've got to,
but from the union's perspective,
this has been really helpful to actually go back
to the employer when we've seen cases of non-compliance
or people being treated poorly.
And so barring this, there would be little else to monitor,
um, performance and to monitor
how the employer is complying.
And I guess in terms of the auditor generals sort of audit
of the health delivery plan as well.
Um, coming back to that
and the importance of, you know, having some sort
of accountability mechanism,
a really good health delivery plan would be contingent on a
supportive workforce and its work is being treated well
and it's hard to see how we can deliver on a, you know,
great health plan if that's not a central part of the plan.
Alright, Hey, uh, Natalia, thank you very much for your,
for your very concise, um, submission
and for presenting to the committee
today. We appreciate it.
Thank you members.
Okay, next up we have Polar Tua Rural Health Network.
Welcome to the Health.
It's very good to have you with see members here
today in front of you.
Um, we've got you for 10 minutes. You've heard it before.
Um, we'll hand that time over to you now. Thank you.
I think I know most of you already.
My name's Grant Davidson, CE of
of the Rural Health Network. And
I'm Peter Jackson, uh, a board member
and also a member of the Maori, uh, iwi Advisory
to Rural Health Network.
I'm from awa.
So we are here today to represent, um, our members
who are a cross section of rural health professionals,
ranging from doctors, nurses, midwives, students
of rural health, rural researchers, um,
each educationalists the complete gambit,
but more importantly, um, the rural communities they serve.
Our vision is to have rural health outcomes
that are equitable for rural people far now
to those in urban communities.
And, uh, that's not the case at the moment.
We just like to recognize the other submitters to the bill
and we, um, we are simplifying our submission today,
recognizing the, um, issues that they've already raised,
especially our, um,
colleagues at the rural New Zealand College of gps.
The current state of health outcomes
for those living in rural areas is disturbingly bad.
Multiple governments, uh,
talk about removing the postcode lottery of healthcare
for New Zealanders that has not been achieved.
Some stats, 90% of New Zealand land is classified as rural
approx, approximately 20%
of New Zealanders live rurally in the
heartland of our nation.
They produce over 80% of our export earnings, mainly
through farming, aquaculture, viticulture, kiwi fruit,
timber, and tourism.
Our country is marketed through images
of our amazing mountains, rivers, beaches, and forests,
and people recreating and enjoying those areas.
However, those images hide the reality of the health system
that is failing the very people that are producing the goods
and services that our population and our nation rely on.
We have demographic groups in rural areas that are twice
as likely to die from a preventable cause
than those in urban areas.
Suicide rates are 60%, 64%, I should say,
higher than urban rates.
Mortality rates 2.5 times higher,
may much higher smoking rates,
much lower immunization rates.
And rural Maori are over represented in all
of those statistics.
We also wanna point out
that urban dwellers shouldn't sit on their laurels here
because you other people visit our areas
during your holidays.
You go skiing, you go rafting,
you take your families up north
and you are going to be subjected
to the same poor health outcomes when you visit those areas,
uh, that the rest of us living rurally exhibit all the time.
So watch the space.
You've got a vested interest in making changes that,
um, are positive.
So we've looked at the, the bill that's in front of us
and, um, we've looked at it through a rural proofing lens.
Many of you may not be aware that the Ministry
of Private Industries has a tool called the Rural Proofing
Tool, and it says that all government departments
and agency should be, um,
looking at any potential legislation
through a rural rural lens.
And, um, we can't see any evidence of that in this bill.
In fact, the bill weakens rural protections, um,
that are exist in the existing act.
So we want to, um, raise three key issues today.
The first is that our members firmly believe that TER
or Ang is the founding document
of the governance in this country.
And through mechanisms under the articles of TI
Murray are afforded rights to the protection
of their health as a Tonga.
And implementation
to this requires an equity focus in planning,
service, delivery and monitoring.
And the government has patently failed these duties since
1840, which has led to the inequitable Maori health outcomes
and many other submitters have addressed these.
Uh, and the statistics that Peter, um, has pointed out show
that is particularly worse in rural areas.
Maori is significantly overrepresented in rural areas.
The more rural you go, the higher the Maori population such
that if you go to remote rural areas,
most populations are over 50%.
Maori empowering Maori health solutions in rural areas,
therefore is advantage advantageous not just for them,
but for all people living in those areas.
We saw that most recently in the COVID e epidemic.
Vaccination rates were poor as soon
as Maori health providers were empowered
to deliver in the areas vaccination rates rose, not just
for Maori, but for everybody living in those areas.
So we can't support this bill. Our members can't.
If moves to re appeal Section six, giving effect to, to
section seven, the South health sector principles.
And the other clause is that disempower IPVs, the HA
and Maori advisory Committee
and the requirement for Maori skills
and knowledge on the Health New Zealand board are enacted.
Second thing we wanna discuss is health targets.
The bill seeks to embed health targets
in strategic documents.
While we hope the intent of this is
to ensure transparent transparency of outcomes
and the targeting of resources, we are concerned that
unless they're clearly defined
and monitored effectively, targets can be gained,
as we've heard from other submitters
and resources actually used ineffectively.
A recent example of this was targeted funding
for smoking cessation.
We completely support moves to reduce smoking
as the highest smoking rates are still in rural areas.
And with rural Maori, however, P hos were able to achieve
or exceed their targets, including for Maori, simply
by focusing their efforts on easy
to reach urban populations.
The most ade, rural
and rural Maori received none of that focus
and funding in many areas.
So we've recommended that if this bill goes through
and targets are embedded, there need
to be monitoring clauses added to ensure that the results
of any, um, interventions can be filtered
by the geographical classification for health.
So we can monitor rural impact
and also ethnicity to ensure
that the postcode lottery is actually addressed
in these targets.
The third point is monitoring.
We believe there are certain parts of the build that need
to be strengthened to ensure transparency
and oversight and monitoring.
We've already heard about clause 11,
which should be explicit,
that intimate implementing requirements
of politically political neutrality
under the Public Service Act does not prevent those
employers and contractors from speaking out to identify
and address issues impacting staff safety or public safety.
We notice that Clause 16 encourages private sector
collaboration, but that needs to be done with care.
We acknowledge that private public partnerships can
strengthen health, health outcomes done well.
And in fact, general practice is an example
of a private public partnership.
But we want to ensure there are safeguards to ensure
that any collaboration does not negatively impact
existing rural healthcare providers
and those priority populations.
Similarly with the infrastructure planning
and private sector collaboration clauses, they also need
to have safeguards to ensure
that priority populations in rural areas get their fair
share of infrastructure planning and investment.
And those, um, to date, we see all of the money going
to hospitals and urban infrastructure not into rural.
We also believe the auditor General must retain the role
of auditing the health plan on behalf
of the people of New Zealand.
So in summary, we oppose the current bill
in its current form.
We've made recommendations for changes.
If the bill does go through
and get support from the coalition government,
we believe the bill as it stands, will undermine piora
and will undermine Piora for rural
and rural Maori populations. Thanks for your time.
Thank you. We've got three questions.
We're probably only gonna have time
for one of them, unfortunately.
Uh, HOA had your hand up first.
Oh yeah. Um, thank you.
And, um, just speaking, um,
and thinking about, um, our people of the North,
for instance and our very rural populations, um,
and we have, you know, sometimes doctor list hospitals, um,
when it comes to the political neutrality part
of the legislation
and the proposed strengthening around that neutrality,
do you think that we need to have provisions in place
to protect the right of health professionals
to express their concerns and worries about workplace safety
and those that they serve?
When we are in instances where we see, um, issues
of concern in terms of health delivery to rural communities?
Oh, without doubt, all health professionals take that oath
to protect the safety of their patients.
And that in includes the ability to speak out
where they see safety as an issue.
Mm-hmm.
Very short. I'm, I've got, I've got this.
Thank you. The, um,
concerns about the incentives on private providers in
rural communities.
Can you elaborate what your worries are there
and how are, how does private provision impact
rural health at the moment?
Health provision, especially rurally, is on a knife edge
of financial sustainability.
There are no, um, uh, volumes
that allow capitation to work.
Um, and we're seeing that through moves
to look at re-weighting of capitation at the moment.
But as soon as you take away through the volume,
and we're seeing the initiative
to have telehealth solutions mm-hmm.
What telehealth does, it takes away the easy to deal
with patients, the ones that you can see in five minutes.
And the, um, rural practitioners left
with those comorbidity.
The patients who are complex,
they need much longer than 15 minutes.
They rely on what easy, easy patients,
they have to balance it out.
As soon as you take that away
and you give telehealth actually more money
to doing the same consultation,
then you're undermining the services, they'll be reduced,
they'll fail, and there'll actually be a, a lapse
of health services further than it is
in rural areas currently.
Thank you. Thank you. Okay. Thank you.
All right. Next up we have, um,
Y 3 3 0 7 claimants, lady Lady Mo here
be joined by, uh, Janice.
Er
welcome to the health committee.
I'm the chair of the National Urban Maori Authority
and the managing director of TECO Health and Kit Hamilton.
Um, I'm Maori health service provider
and we serve thousands of
every year across health, education, social justice,
and correction services.
Thank you.
Sorry. Uh, uh, I'm from
WAN and I'm here, uh, representing a
of Maori providers
and also, uh, a long claimant like Lady two 80.
Um, we want to stress from the outset
that we oppose the bill in its entirety.
We are, um, the original claimants, um,
who took the Y 1 3 1 5 claim
to the Ang Tribunal in 2005.
Y 2 5 7 5 whole water claim was heard in
2018.
So a great deal of time
and effort went into the establishment of Takata
and the co-design of the PTA act.
The PTA act was the best example of
what a threet partnership could be between the Crown
and Iwi Maori as envisaged by Orgi in 1840.
It was an outward
and visible sign that the Crown recognized Tigi in health
and was prepared to share power
and control with its ti partner
for the betterment of all who call New Zealand our home.
But instead, the Crown has done what it often does
when they think Iwi Maori are getting too big for our boots.
They take back the power
and control in the name of one health system for all,
despite the continuous failure of the health system
to prevent Maori dying prematurely from
preventable diseases.
I have been a claimant in the WA tribunal for years
because I have seen time and time again.
The health system fail, fails our people.
TKA gave us a voice at the top table
and the authority to make decisions about our own health.
Its Disestablishment was a huge step backwards.
The bill entrenches that loss
and removes the only remaining Titi based
safeguards in the health system.
This bill strips out the Titi commitments.
The repeal of the health charter
and principles removes the only
Titi based tools left in the system.
Tools that recognize Ang equity
cultural safety and partnership.
Without them, it will be easier for the Crown
to make decisions that continue to harm Maori.
The bill also deletes the requirements
that board members should show to Titi Tikanga
and equity people without that knowledge do not know
how not to make good decisions for Maori health.
Jaka was working, it had equal decision making
with Auta Health New Zealand.
It met weekly with the minister,
ensuring Maori voices were at the top table.
It entrusted
and backed Maori providers cut red tape
and got resources to the frontline faster.
The Crown offered no evidence-based reason
for Disestablishing.
It Disestablishment was purely political,
not evidence-based.
This bill builds on that harm.
So we are saying do not make these changes.
Do not continue to deme, dismantle
and based health reforms.
Instead, support Maori to establish a new fare designed
and controlled by Maori, properly resourced, protected
by in-law, able to make decisions and not to give inclusive
and iwi, um, inclusive of Iwi, hapu, WAU
and Urban Maori.
That is what true partnership looks like
and that is what will save lives
and it should therefore should be abandoned.
Thank you Today, um,
because we're probably very similar in the things we do,
I'm just going to summarize some of the points I've made
so that won't be repetitive.
So, uh, like Lady today, uh, we thought the pay order,
the Health Futures legislation, um,
contained all the essential elements
to rebuild our more principled
and equitable health system for us, um, a treaty was
to be the UA that enabled this to happen.
As we all know that legislation soon come under attack.
Begin with the disestablishment of Chaka.
I'm here today because this build enters its
needs destructive phase.
It now intends to complete the job
and reduce the iwi Maori voice from any form of
and eliminate city and equitable obligations.
Believe this bill takes us backwards.
It distance iwi Maori partnership
boards from decision makers.
Instead of working directly with Health New Zealand,
the advice now must flow through the uh,
ha Maori advisory committee, which has no power.
This further reduces Maori influence over services
that affect our people.
What we have seen on the ground is deeply concerning.
Since Jata was PO by this government,
Maori leadership in health has been slashed.
The ho Maori team in Health New Zealand has been cut
to a third of its size.
The Maori director and the Minister of Health has sidelined.
The Ho Maori advisory Committee has no staff, no budget,
and only meets the minister handful full of times a year.
Contracts they should support equity have gone
to non Maori organizations.
In fact, one such provider,
which has a poor record in reaching Maori,
was awarded $1 million contract to vaccinate Maori babies.
They managed to vaccinate only 53 children.
A majority of these Tariq already been looked
after in primary care.
Meanwhile, Maori providers
who excel in reaching Maori were bypassed.
We are not asking for tweaks in this legislation.
We are asking to abandon the harmful bill Every clause,
removing the chart and principles, sidelining iwi,
Maori partnership boards, prioritizing infrastructure
and privatization takes us further from equity
and from Titi.
Instead. As we have emphasized
and repeated over the years, both today
and myself, Maori must be supported, designed their own
order through Maori led health body resource, properly
protected in law and with decision making power.
Now, we repeated that for the last 20 years,
but we repeated again.
Thank you. Thank you Dr. Vera.
Thank you. Uh, akafia was repealed in the last,
uh, bel that has passed.
And this bill, while you've touched on many of the points,
primarily I'm interested in how it is diminishing the powers
of Iwi Maori partnership boards.
Can you explain how Iwi Maori partnership boards can
practically make positive health gains for Maori
with the powers as they're currently written?
Not the amendment?
Well At the, at the, at the present time, the bill is,
is showing very clearly that it's only a,
um, advisory committee now. Understood.
And how could it be better? What
Would Well, what the, what the bill, um,
originally stated was that they would become commissioners.
They would be able to commission
to services strategy, strategic commissions.
Yes. Strategic commissioners in their own communities and,
and with the, alongside the, the lo localities
that were a part and parcel of the, of the whole bill.
But that's all been wiped. Mm-hmm.
And so, so what we had in Hoki, for example, um, was was
all the, the, the councils coming together, all
of the various community groups coming together alongside
of Maori and Iwi mm-hmm.
All together. And that to me was, was the greatest thing
that we could have done in our communities.
Because why? Because they're the ones
who live in their communities and know their communities.
We've got time for one more.
Both of you have your hand up.
I was gonna step on Aisha's question, so
Sorry.
Yeah. Um, I'm just mindful
of you raising the Hoki example fire and, um, thank you.
'cause it's been quite distressing listening
to your submission, knowing the long journey
that you've taken and acknowledging the system
that was established
and the vision of Iwi Maori partnership boards
and the localities was a great example of the locality plan
that was to feed up, to build the system for local delivery.
Um, you know, do, do you think that in the disestablishing
of that power and the strategic commissioning, um,
that Maori voice is, is distanced further away, um,
and now being held in a small advisory committee that, um,
it's really a gutting, um, the opportunity to, uh,
focus on health equity for a rural community such as Hoki?
Oh, absolutely. And, and,
and the, the thing about this is that what, what we,
what we've got now is an advisory group
advising another advisory group to a minister.
I mean, we, you know, that the,
where is the mana in that?
The mana in is
that the Iwi Maori partnership boards have an important
place in our, in our country.
They have an important role to play
and relegating them down to being just advisory
to an advisory group to me takes away every bit of mana
that, um, these communities deserve.
Thank you. Thank you very much. I'm sorry and grateful.
Um, but yeah, we're at time. We're over time.
Uh, thank you very much for coming
in and for your submission today. Go
Shut.
Thank you.
Okay, next up we have medicines New Zealand,
who are joining us via Zoom.
Excellent. We've got, uh, Tanya Baker here
from Edisons New Zealand.
Tanya, welcome to the Health committee.
I'm Sam Dale, members around the table,
and we have you here for 10 minutes.
You may leave us time for questions if you want,
but I'll hand that to you now.
Thank you.
Thank you Chair. Um, good morning to the committee
and, and thank you for your attention
to our submission today.
Um, medicine's New Zealand chair, Dr.
Um, CEO rather, Dr. Graham Jarvis did wish to be oh,
with me today presenting on our submission, unfortunately,
and he's overseas at the moment.
SMI, we're in different locations
and, um, my internet is better than his.
So you've got me today.
And so as you'll be well aware,
medicines New Zealand is the Industry Association
representing biopharmaceutical companies
operating in New Zealand.
And our companies are key stakeholders in the functioning
of the public health system
because they're the providers of effective, safe
and high quality modern prescription medicines and vaccines.
And of course, these therapies are very critical
to the health and wellbeing of New Zealanders.
Now our time today is, is short,
but hopefully we've got three very clear points that, um,
we are wishing to make to the committee.
And they're probably going to be fairly familiar points
to the committee, but they are solutions focused
and we have some recommendations for revisions
for the legislation, um, that we think will better inform
and direct the delivery of the desired improvements
to the public health system.
And we hope that the select committee, the government
and obviously responsible officials, um, will take note
of our recommendations.
So in summary, uh, three recommendations are firstly,
uh, we consider that a medicine strategy is needed.
Secondly, we think that the statutory objectives
and functions for p should be made fit for purpose.
And thirdly, we think that the importance of timely access
to modern medicines and vaccines should be recognized in the
healthy futures of legislation.
So, going into a little bit more detail about the reasons
for these recommendations,
I'll firstly talk about the medicine strategy.
So the healthy future PY AA amendment bill aims
to strengthen the strategic direction setting in the health
system, but actually it currently fails
to address the significant strategic deficit there is
concerning the use of medicines
and vaccines in the health system.
This isn't a new situation, it's a longstanding issue.
And in fact, in terms
of the the foundational Principle Act here,
we also advocated for, um, the institution
of medicine strategy.
So we hear again saying that a relatively simple amendment
of the bill in this case, addition of a clause requiring
that a new section 46 B be added from medicine strategy
would be both straightforward to effect
and would actually be entirely consistent
with the overall direction of the proposed bill
to improve strategic planning
and direction setting in the health system.
And you'll remember last year there was a,
a summit at Parliament Valuing Life Medicines Access Summit.
And a clear finding of that summit was that establishment
of a future proof multi-stakeholder strategy would give
longer term certainty for health system stakeholders
and would be of real value.
Now in, in terms of the summit, the white paper
that came out from that event included a number
of recommendations for suitable medicine strategy.
And, but in a nutshell, it spoke to the need for there
to be a clear vision, mission, priorities,
and targets with robust outcomes
and measures, including international benchmarking added in.
And we would suggest that that should include reference
to investment trajectory
and standards of care in terms of access
to modern medicines and vaccines.
The medicine strategy should align
with health system priorities
to break down the current siloed approach there is
to medicines investment.
And there's been ample evidence over recent years concerning
that issue of siloed investment in medicines and vaccines.
Now, the strategy should also provide
for a national horizon scaling platform
and a process to allow for the identification
of emerging health technologies
and support planning for their
incorporation into their health system.
And given, you know, we are on, on the edge of a wave
of advanced therapies moving closer to market availability,
but significant uncertainty within our local health system
and also significant international volatility,
potential significance of
and need for medicine strategy is actually growing.
Um, and lastly, with respect to the medicine strategy,
we would just like to say that actually implementation
or development of a medicine strategy would then, um,
delivery on a critical health related commitment made
during the government's coalition negotiations.
And for that particular reason that we would advocate
for the prioritization of establishment
of the medicine strategy
and would recommend that clause 33 of the bill be amended
to allow for preparation
and determination of the new medicine strategy within 12
months of the acts commencement date.
Now our second recommendation concerns the statutory
objectives and functions of pharm.
And in section 3.4 of our submission,
we actually provide a suggestion as to suitable drafting
of phar statutory objectives.
Now this is a suggestion
and once again, based on the clear recommendation for action
that came from the value in Life Medicine access
summit and the white paper.
But once again, just, um, distilling that down,
we're essentially recommending that pharmac objectives
in order to be future proofed
and fit for purpose, should have a focus on best health
outcomes, the appropriate incorporation of societal benefit
and medicine funding decisions that are consistent
with overall health system priorities.
And a particular note with respect
to those statutory objectives
and functions phrases such as within the amount of funding
provided and within the amount of funding
provided to it from section 68 1 A
and 69 respectfully of the Principal Act should be removed.
Um, and that's important to ensure
that there is actually fit
for purpose legislative requirements for Farm Act.
Now you might say that as a representative
of the medicine sector, it's no surprise
that I'm advocating today for the removal of that wording
that sets the funding cap legislation,
but I'd just like to point out in response to that,
that actually all health entities have a responsibility
to the prudent use of public money appropriately to them.
But presently stands alone in an isolated position
as the only health entity with a legislative budget cap,
and is evidence from a diverse array of sources that
legislated focus on cost containment
and served many New Zealand patients very poorly
and resulted in siloed organizational practices
that have actually moved costs
and pressures downstream, including on
to the wider health system.
Now the third recommendation to talk
to you about today relates to timely access
to innovative medicines and vaccines.
And obviously timeliness
of quality care is a focus of this bill.
And so we would suggest that timely access
to health services, um, must include timely access
to modern medicines and vaccines,
and that it's actually a factor in public trust
and confidence in the system being fit.
Um, released the results of a survey we had commissioned,
found eight outta 10 New Zealanders
consider having publicly funded access to modern medicines,
essential to the health system.
And really that finding shouldn't be any surprise given
that at about the same time,
and on the 6th of August when we released the survey,
there were in fact 79 medicines awaiting funding on Pharmac
options for investment list.
Now those are medicines are medicines which have already
been assessed to be therapeutically valuable
and cost effective, and they're related in this case
to 110 clinical indications.
So a, a diverse ray
of patients would've benefited from those treatments.
Really as says numbers I've just given you, you demonstrate
current operational practices, including the use
of an options for investment medicines waiting list,
have really been, um, developed an attempt
to manage the situation they have
with a cap and limited budget.
And they don't support timely access to modern medicines
and vaccines for patients.
And they certainly don't support the strategic use
of new treatments in the health system in order
to support the day-to-day ability of the health system
to operate efficiently
and provide quality health services
to New Zealanders in a timely manner,
there actually should be stronger direction in the
legislation to support the timely funding
and timely access to those innovative treatments.
So to make that a possibility, our suggestion,
our consideration is
that the government policy statement on health needs
to make clear that timely access to modern medicines
and vaccines is a priority for the public health sector.
And, and establishing that priority, it's important
that it's clear that timely access
and the setting of associated targets for
that access don't just relate to the timeliness
of funding decisions by phar,
but that it also encompasses the timely of delivery
of those treatments
and in instances where the treatments must treatments
are administered in the health system
by a healthcare professional.
So just in, in closing conscious of time
and would like to, to round off by noting that medicines
and vaccines really are essential tools
and the delivery of efficient
and quality healthcare two patients, it's something
that's equally true in community
and primary healthcare settings through to the needs
of those patients who unfortunately find
themselves in hospital.
So we think the committee for attention
to our recommendation for the, um,
proposed legislation today, we really do consider that.
Um, thank you. These recommendations if implemented will
increase timeliness of access.
Thank you. Thank you very much Tanya.
Um, appreciate you joining us this morning
and, uh, presenting to the committee.
Thank you for your submission. Thank you. Good day.
Okay, next up we have two Fadi
to Iwi Maori Punch Board joining us by Zoom.
Good morning. Welcome, welcome to the Health Committee.
Uh, we have you for, um, 10 minutes today.
You can leave us some time for questions if you want.
Um, but no, very good to have you here.
And I'll hand that time to you now, Kiara.
Uh, I am the chair of the
Iwi Maori Partnership Board.
Uh, thank you Mr. Chair
and members of the committee for this opportunity.
Uh, I will take our written submission as read
and instead highlight a few key points.
At the heart of this bill is T or Ang for us.
Our rights are clear, but alongside those rights
responsibilities, we are mandated by our hapu and iwi.
We are kaki not only for our tribal members,
but for all au who live within our,
our responsibility is to work in partnership
with Health New Zealand, with the Ministry of Health
and with other crown agents such
as the Ho Maori Advisory Committee or HAC.
But let me be clear, we are not agents of the crown.
We do not serve government departments and our ac our com.
Our accountability is to our hapu
and iwi, not to ministers.
We are the mandated voice, guided by their aspirations
and responsible for protecting their wellbeing.
That distinction matters.
It defines our authority, preserves our independence,
and enables us to hold the system to account
the Waitangi Tribunal.
And its stage one Y 2 5 7 5 report
was unambiguous.
The Simpson Review similarly highlighted systemic
inequalities and gaps in Maori health outcomes.
Despite decades of strategies
and policies, Maori health outcomes continue to lag
behind those of non Maori.
And the tribunal found this is not
because of individual choices, but
because the Crown had failed, it failed
to fund Maori equitably, failed
to remove structural barriers and failed to honor ity
and health governance.
That is why the tribunal called Force strengthened Maori
decision making that was reflected in the reforms that
comprised a standalone Maori health authority
with commissioning power, I iwi Maori partnership boards
to drive local solutions and to end
and an end to toothless advisory bodies like HAC
that lacked power, resources and independence.
IBS were created to embody Maori self-determination
and independent authority at local levels.
IBS are best placed to identify
and address the needs of the communities we serve.
Our role is not simply to advise, our role is
to design, deliver, and monitor services alongside the crown
and to help keep our people well
and to support their return
to wellness when they are unwell.
To do that, we need authority and we need resources.
If we are to be s in the system,
the system must equip us to govern.
And here is the critical point.
This government made a deliberate decision
to disestablish taka order
and doing so, ministers were clear
Iwi Maori partnership boards would step into that space,
that we would be supported with commissioning resources
to carry out that role.
That was the assurance
and commitment given by the honorable Shane.
He genuinely sought a partnership with Iwi and Hapu
and I acknowledge and commend that leadership.
Yet the bill before us strips away that promise.
Instead of strengthening Iwi Maori partnership boards
with commissioning powers, the bill reduces us
to advisory bodies reporting to HAC.
That is a backward step.
It breaks faith with iwi and hapu
and undermines the opportunity for genuine system reform.
That was the basis of the Waitangi Tribunal
and Simpson review reports if passed as drafted,
this bill removes IBS from direct partnership
with Health New Zealand narrows our role
to community engagement only
and centralizes engagement under HAC,
the very body the tribunal found to be ineffective
and toothless that makes the system less accountable,
less responsive, and less effective for Maori
and non-Maori alike.
We are asking this committee to
reinstate the original statutory functions of ibs
Activate Section 90.
So IBS can nominate members to HAC strengthen our role
to include commissioning Kapa Maori services
and ensure we are properly resourced
to deliver on the responsibilities our hapu
and iwi have given us.
This is not about parallelism, it is about partnership.
It is about sharing power, sharing responsibility,
and sharing accountability in order
to achieve equitable outcomes.
The ACT was a bold commitment
to transform our health system in genuine
partnership with Maori.
That commitment should not be abandoned.
Strengthening IBS is the most direct pathway
to a health system that is more transparent, more efficient,
and more focused on delivering better outcomes.
For all. Iwi and Hapu are ready to lead.
We ask you to honor that readiness kilda.
Right. Um, Dr. Vera, uh,
Thank you very much, uh, for your submission, Louisa,
and, uh, just want to acknowledge your service
to the health committee and,
and your time as a member of Parliament.
Can you please, uh, help the committee understand
what the loss of monitoring powers by
IBS mean about mean for, um, accountability
of services at the local level?
Uh, well that is a very good question. Thank you. Asia.
Uh, we actually have already, uh, prepared a monitoring
report, uh, that essentially
will focus on the priorities that the health system has,
um, has made.
Uh, obviously from our perspective, our role is to provide,
uh, information from, uh, the users of the services.
So through our collection of whanau voice
to determine the effectiveness of the accessibility
of the service to our people.
And so that monitoring function, um, I,
and we see as a critical role that we can play
to feed back into the health system itself so that, uh,
we can develop a more effective strategies, uh,
for instance and, and continuing
to focus on increasing immunization levels.
For example, um, the biggest barriers that we face, um,
is access to primary care.
And unfortunately, what our whanau voice, uh,
statistic tells us is that our people are intervening, uh,
and engaging with the system, um, at the hospital level,
which is why you have, uh, eds that are unable to cope.
So the monitoring function, um, was a transparent way
of then working together with the community to try
and provide better pathways for earlier access
for the New Zealanders.
Um, and in a manner
and, uh, involving, um, you know, working
with our local providers to, to better provide that access,
whether it be through mobile clinics
or through who, uh, through clinics hosted on Marai,
for example, which provide much more welcoming, um, spaces
for our people to access those services.
So the monitoring function,
and we saw as part of the continuing of the commissioning
of services, um, that would essentially enable us
to better design and deliver, which then rolls into the,
the, um, opportunity for us to commission our own services
that make them more effective.
So sorry if that was a bit of a ramble,
but Well, we can certainly send you our monitoring
report if that's helpful.
Thank you.
And thank you for your advocacy
for Iwi Maori partnership board voice to be, uh, shared.
Uh, before the select committee, I wanted to follow on
around monitoring, um, but also the connection.
So in the relegation of Iwi Maori partnership boards
to whanau voice, um, and,
and the elevating of the HA as the,
the strategic voice for Maori.
Can I ask, has the Howard Maori advisory Committee met
with IMP bs?
Uh, not yet, but we have a meeting scheduled
for the 22nd of September.
So to date, you have had no who?
No. And previously we've only had one hooi.
So, uh, there wasn't actually a,
I'll call it formal relationship between H Mac
and the I pbs.
Um, but as I noted, we see HA as a crown agent.
All HA members are appointed by the Crown responsible
to the minister, obviously advise the minister.
But in the first iteration of the legislation,
IBS had an opportunity to, um, appoint our own members
of H Mac, which obviously would've made the relationship,
uh, with the minister a lot stronger and joined up.
Um, but the way the, uh, legislation has been drafted,
essentially HAC become the Maori voice
and our contention is they can never be
'cause they're not mandated by Hawi.
Thank you, Melissa.
Um, there's a really good submission, so thank you
for presenting to the committee today. Um,
KDA, thank you Sam Kda.
Thank you.
Okay, next up we have to,
to Ang and
Primary Health Organization.
Good morning. Good to have you here.
Um, you've been here for a while, so I won't say what the,
what the process is, but you know,
you, you've got 10 minutes.
I'll hand that time to you now. Thank you.
Uh, chairperson members of the Health Select Committee,
uh, thank you for the opportunity
to appear before you today.
On behalf of TE and p,
uh, my name is Michaelo and I'm the director of Health Mat.
And today I'm here with
Oh, uh, I'm the, uh,
strategy poet at, and I'm here to represent our C HEL mod
and our executive leadership team
and support our submission Hilda.
And I'd just like to take a moment to acknowledge our ran,
our CEO Hamed lik who's unable to be with us today.
I'm here to speak on, on our submission
to the Health Select Committee on the
Healthy Futures Amendment.
Bill. As the mandated authority for naati ran, the roles
of TE RAN and Tour PHO is to protect
and enhance the mano of our people to advance the HO water
and wellbeing needs of RA.
Auditor has grown to serve the HO water needs
of our communities across and Wellington through our general
and practice clinics,
various community health service offerings,
and mental health counseling and addiction services.
Our position is very clear in order
to PHO oppose amendments that we can obligations
remove the health principles and diminish
and dilute the role of Iwi Maori partnership boards.
We support retaining the original provisions
of the Piata Act 2022 to embed equity, accountability
and iwi partnership into the health system.
I would like to share with you a few concerns
with you today, section six of uh,
the proposed changes shift obligation solely
to the Ho Maori Advisory Committee, we strongly oppose this.
Ity obligations must be upheld at all levels
of the health system, including the Health New Zealand Board
and operational leadership.
Accountability must be embedded across the system,
strengthening legislative parameters,
the most effective mechanism to ensure obligations are met.
We recommend retaining Section six paragraphs, kilo, Lima,
and Mike to preserve these obligations.
Section seven, health Sector principles.
These principles were introduced to ensure equity
Maori participation in decision making,
cultural safe services, and a
representative of health workforce.
Repealing these principles undermines the progress made
toward Maori health equity
and risks, reversing gains
achieved under the original Pay Order Act.
We recommend retaining Section seven in its entirety,
sections 29 and 30 iwi Maori partnership boards.
I'd like to take a moment to acknowledge the leadership
of the Tiwa au IRI Maori partnership Board.
Since its establishment, it has exemplified the intent
of the Payor Act by amplifying whanau voice
and informing regional health planning.
The proposed changes diminish
and dilute the role of IRI Maori partnership boards
limiting their influence and advisory functions via the Au
Maori advisory Committee.
This undermines the localized iwi
Hapu led health leadership.
We recommend retaining sections 29
and 30 in full to preserve the integrity
and autonomy of Iwi Maori partnership boards.
I would like to share with you this morning a
few broader concerns.
Removing explicit references to T
and Maori ignores the findings of wife
Y 2 5 7 5, where the crown was found in breach for failing
to address persistent Maori health inequities.
NA has been constant in holding the crown to account
to uphold the guarantees made in the articles of Ang,
the articles of Ang unchanging Covenant signed
between NA and the Crown.
The covenant is expressed through the principles of
which under settlement 2012
and claims settlement Act 2014.
The bill also removes equity focused principles
and targets which risks making inequalities invisible.
What is unseen is uncounted for
and what is uncounted is left unchanged.
Furthermore, ethnicity is a valid measure of health,
health need and essential for planning and prioritization.
Without this focus, equity cannot be achieved
and treating everyone the same.
Only in trenches inequities.
Today we strongly urge the select committee
to reject amendments that weakened totality obligations
of Maori health principles.
The title of the act should remain by order, uh,
healthy Futures Act 2022 reordering the name is unnecessary.
In our view, the consultation process has been inadequate
and does not reflect the time, the commitment,
and the expertise of Maori health providers
that have invested their time
and energy in the original act.
To recap, our recommendations are to retain in section six,
retain subsections kilo Lima Mike, section seven,
retain in full section 29
and 30, retain in full
enclo today 92 remains committed
to improving her water outcomes for our people,
and we ask the committee to uphold the intent
of the original PA Act to ensure Maori voices remain central
to the health system transformation, nor
Thank you. We've
got some questions here. We've got.
Alright. Thank you so much for your submission.
Um, and I want to, um, join in your recognition of
partnership board, which is the Iwi Maori partnership board
that Nati is Sure.
Connected with.
Um, I've visited that Iwi Maori partnership board
and I wonder if one opportunity
to get past the politicization of Maori health is for you
to talk about the practical things that,
that Iwi Maori partnership was board was
doing to improve Maori health.
Thank you. Um, we, we, uh, as,
uh, P hos, local P hos in the Wellton area district, uh,
meet often with the ibs.
We have regular scheduled monthly meetings with them, uh,
and talking about certain important, uh, areas of focus.
We also, um, there is an active,
active participation, um,
and planning, uh, between, uh, between us as all P
HGA and uh, INPP.
And so there's a, a, um, a real cohesion
and collectiveness around
or active, really activeness around planning, um,
focused priorities and we, and, and we make really regular
Could, could I just add just, just to that, um,
they've also produced some data
and insights which have been invaluable for us in our work.
And we are not just, um, in the health sector.
So you may know that we've recently become a whanau
water commissioning agency.
And so, um, being able to leverage, um, that information
and data has been invaluable
and will be invaluable going forward across all of the mahi
that we do in the social services space for our community.
Probably got time for one question.
Yeah, I just wanted to ask, um, Tina Cord,
and I wanted to ask you the question I guess that I also,
um, originally wanted to put to Lady two
as I could hear the anger I think in her voice in terms
of zooming out and understanding
how important relationship is in Maori, the passage
of this bill in its current form, what will that do for
Maori crown relationships?
Because we hear in the house that everything is Kapa.
Uh, that is not the undertone that I'm hearing,
and I'm just wondering if you can tell us in your words
the impact that this will have on the wider relationship
between Crown and Maori?
That's a good question. Um, I can only,
I can speak on behalf of Una, um,
but I, the relationship will continue, uh,
but it will be strained
and challenged when there's any dilution to
or ang, um, or any suppression of those spaces.
Um, it's really challenging.
And so the, the settlement, uh, arrangements
or the guarantees were between two parties.
And so, uh, the has come to the table and,
and I would, uh, interpret
or suspect that maybe the other party hasn't, um,
I stood up their, their requirements, uh,
or their obligations as a part of that, uh, agreement.
And so, uh, those, those relationships will be challenged,
will be, will be strained.
Yeah. Yeah.
Thank you. We we're over time.
Thank you very much for your presentation today.
Next we have, uh,
Is something just
Welcome to the health committee.
Very good to have you presenting today.
We have you for minutes.
You may leave time for questions if you wish.
I'll hand that time to you now. Thank you.
We are members of the National Maori lived experience
with living experience of
we represent the vast network of voices from Maori.
We live with the realities of distress, substance recovery,
and health inequities across ro at the heart of our
s the truth, both clear
and intent, yet profound an impact to ensure that
with the experiences of have a direct voice in shaping
our health system that serves Maori and
or people Maori with the experiences of
this is not just about policy.
The decisions this government will make would either sustain
life or diminish it.
We both have an obligation
and accountability, which is why we are here.
We are here today to stand in our accountability
to Tanga Maori today.
We are here to honor and uplift their voices, experiences,
and aspirations, ensuring they are heard, recognized,
and acted upon.
Our today is grounded in the Treaty of Tang principles
as defined by the Crown Partnership
working alongside Maori, not as an afterthought,
but as equal partners protection,
safeguarding Maori rights, health
and wellbeing from harm, including harm caused
by legislation participation,
ensuring Maori are not just included
but are enabled to lead, contribute,
and shape the decisions that affect their lives.
Our positioning is clear to keep the reject their
by order healthy future we call for the retention
and strengthening of the current payor Healthy Future
Experience Governance is highlighted by my colleague.
Our submission is structured through the ends
of the three treaty principles defined by the Crown
Partnership, protection and Participation.
These are not abstract ideas,
they're foundation based on ideology.
The Crown promised Maori
promises made in 1840.
So today we will explore how this bill
before us negates those promises.
Partnerships, partnership requires the Crown
and Maori to act together as,
as equals in decision making.
It is more than consultation. It is shared power.
It is co-designed co-leadership
and co-governance was the first time in
history that Maori had a dedicated
independent national health authority.
It was the embodiment of partnership.
Maori leading alongside Crown Structures
partnership requires the Crown
and Maori to act together as equals in decision making.
This bill endorses the disestablishment of ura.
Yet the reality is URA
was formally disestablished in on the 30th of June, 2024.
The first ever Maori Health Authority established under the
act was taken away.
In less than two years,
this decision was carried out without meaningful
consultation with Maori.
Despite the Crown's duty to act in good faith,
the waiting Tribunal itself has found
that the Crown's process breach the principles
of partnership by ignoring the voices
of and iwi.
Furthermore, the Bill downgrades iwi Maori partnership
boards to token advisory groups
stripping away decision making power
and granting the crown power
to appoint Maori representatives
rather than allowing FAU and Hapu the right to choose.
This is not partnership, it is he
a deliberate violation of power.
Maori suicide prevention initiatives like UA
succeeded because Maori co-lead the design
without Maori lead structures such initiatives risk being
sidelined or defunded, undoing any progress
that has been made to restore faith and trust
and government structures.
Our recommendation is to establish
and retain Tura as an independent Maori health authority.
Doing so, acknowledges shared governance
and good leadership retain iwi Maori partnership boards
with statutory powers and commissioning and decision making.
Modeling respectful
and reciprocal relationships ensure Maori
appoint their own representatives, not the crown,
ensuring equity and fairness, cultural integrity
and stronger outcomes.
Protection. Protection requires the crown
to actively safeguard Maori wellbeing, equity,
and cultural safety.
This bill removes treaty obligations
and protection for Tikanga and Kpa Maori.
Here it prioritizes private providers over COPA
MA and reduces oversight
to no auditor general reporting.
Without this independent scrutiny, there is greater risk
of mismanagement, inefficiency,
or inequitable resourcing
an indigenous approach to mental health,
mental health service
and services in Wellington
and ua.
A community based s point
of entry service in Gisborne are just to name a few
are critical to ensuring effective culturally safe
and accountable services that
have consistently proven higher engagement
and recovery for Maori living with experiences
of ha watering for mental distress.
This improvement in Maori mental health is testimony
to the efficacy of Copa Maori services
made possible through the protection
and financial investment from this government.
Without explicit protection and funding scrutiny services
and organizations like this are at risk.
And consequently, so are the people
relying on these services.
Participation is more than consultation.
It means Maori are inclusive in deciding
and designing our future.
As you have heard, this bill strips away the rights of Maori
to appoint our own representatives.
Its sidelines approaches.
It shifts the focus to hospital targets.
Miss, uh, instead of prevention, Maia twice
as likely to die by suicide as non Maori.
Many of these crises could have been prevented
with early whanau centered support.
Removing Maori participation in decision making
means less investment in prevention
and again, more lives lost.
The impact whanau are excluded from governance
prevention is sidelined
and increased reliance on crisis care.
I'm gonna have to jump in here 'cause we're we're at time
And Just wanted to say thank you very much
for your submission for the committee today.
We have questions.
All right, next up we have patient voice.
Um, I actually came in here with a plain spiel
and as I was sitting at the back, I thought,
actually I'm gonna change it.
Um, having listened to the voices of other concerned, um,
citizens and stakeholders, uh,
the last time I was in this particular room,
I had my wife wiki with me, and that was in December, 2018.
And Wiki was plead for her life along those, um,
of her Medi Viva community.
Um, there was myself, there was Wiki
and there was another lady called Terry Nicholson.
And Terry sadly is also no longer with us.
And I reflect back to that time
and in listening to the submissions, think
what would they make of what the government
is attempting to do.
And so what I want to do today is actually talk
to you about real life examples of what,
how this may actually play out.
So we heard very, uh,
eloquently from Grant Davidson from Rural Health about
what happened in COVID.
I don't wish to re-litigate what happened in terms
of the vaccine rollout,
but we're all patently aware
that the delay in the vaccine rollout was due to the fact
that Maori uptake was low
and that the success of that vaccine rollout was the ability
to engage with Maori providers in the Maori community
and lift vaccination rates.
What that meant for my whanau
and my wife was that she was unable
to fulfill her bucket list
because she was, um, stranded in the house like
so many other New Zealanders
and she was happy to play her part,
but there was certainly frustration there
that we couldn't get those vaccination numbers higher,
quicker and
therefore she wasn't able to fulfill her last wish,
which was to go to T Mata and see, um, the Mighty tree.
Not only that, her funeral was one of those ones
that was restricted by numbers due to COVID.
And so again, I think this legislation is in place which
dilutes to Titi
and basically negates the effectiveness of engagement
with those Maori health providers.
Would that mean if we were to have another pandemic
that we would actually take longer
to lift those vaccination rates?
The second point I would like to make is
that Wiki was here arguing for Ibrance to be funded
or palase cycl, um, under the legislation
that's proposed clause 11, um,
that effectively clinicians will be gagged.
Uh, if that was to happen then we would not have the voice
of clinicians who spoke out about the need to fund Ibrance
in that, uh, campaign and journey.
Clinicians already have a low morale.
It's no great surprise.
I have engaged with many
of them throughout the country over the past year
doing a national roadshow.
A couple have commented.
So if they pass this legislation
and I speak out about a particular aspect
of the health system, what are they gonna do?
Are they gonna sack me?
Especially when we've got a crisis when
it comes to staffing levels.
The third point that I would like to make,
and if you remember nothing else, I would urge you
to remember this, is that again, when I think back
to Wiki's submission
and to the other MediVis who made a submission,
they were frustrated with the slowness of PC
and the inability to look at, um,
what the savings would be to the wider health system
and also the taxpayer should they fund the drug
that she wanted funded Ibrance.
And the way that P Act statutory objective is worded,
which we have heard from medicine then said is that it reads
and from within the amount of funding
provided, we interpret that to give far
and myopic focus purely on their own budget
and their own cost as opposed to, um, wider health savings
and societal benefits.
We would strongly urge you to delete, um,
that from Farm Act statutory objective.
Just those few words alone,
we believe would create a new culture within pharma
where they would be more outward looking.
They would actually look at the benefits
of funding particular medicines,
including the savings on the health system and the taxpayer.
Oh, oh man. Oh, sorry. Thank you very much, Jenny. Mark.
Um, thank you Malcolm
and acknowledging Wiki here the last time you were here.
Mm. Um, and I think I was the only other person in the room
that was here at the same time, so, um,
just acknowledging that.
Thank you for being here today.
Thank you. Uh,
and of course it was a very mighty powerful submission, um,
that we heard from, from Wiki and yourself
and the other survivors.
Of course. Look, I think it's an important point
that you've made around pharma, uh, to be outward looking,
um, and those having, having an, uh, a wider
view of the gains across the health system.
Um, and really, so that's your, that's the takeaway point.
It is you are wanting the committee to,
If you remember nothing else, remember that. Yeah,
Right. Is is there
anything, any other detail you
want to give to that?
Uh, no, I just think by deleting it,
it will give harm the ability
to look wider than what they currently do.
So rather than just focusing on their bottom line,
they can actually look at what the
savings are to the health system.
I would also note that as far as I'm aware,
they're the only, uh, health entity that has
that in their statutory objective.
Um, and they're already, um, beholden
to the Crown Entities Act,
which says they can't come over budget anyhow.
Thank you. Alright, we'll go to Isha.
And then, um, Kia Malcolm, um,
you have done 33 public meetings about healthcare
around the country in the last year or so.
Uh, what are you hearing about
where the community's at with respect to Maori health and
therefore how do you, uh, feel about whether these changes
diminishing IBS roles are necessary or not?
Uh, I think it will just simply worsen the crisis
that we currently face.
Certainly engagement with IMPB Maori stakeholders.
Some of the communities that I visited
where there was a high Maori population are suffering
where there shouldn't be suffering.
We live in New Zealand, we are not a third world country.
We are a developed nation as far as I'm aware.
I'm also mindful of the words of the mayor from Craig Little
who said to me, if it wasn't
for our Maori health providers in this community, we
the collective, we would have nothing.
Thank you. Just, um, supplementing off, um,
Aisha to you
and the mobilization, you, Kai Corty, um, of people, um,
can you share with the committee, uh, accorded
or around the bull declaration and, um,
and what you and our communities are declaring
to the government and to us as members of
Parliament? Yeah, thank
you. So the bullet declaration makes five
points says, from a state of crisis, when the government
to urgently fix that crisis, um,
rural Maori low income are disproportionately affected.
Um, we need to do better under ti and Maori health outcomes.
And lastly, we need to recruit, retain, uh, more doctors,
nurses, specialists, midwives, allied health professionals,
um, basically the entire workforce.
It has been met with
widespread approval in the communities that I have visited.
It would be fair to say that only 5% are refusing to sign.
Only 5% are signing
and it is on track to become the world's
longest ever petition.
Well done. Good to see you again. Thank you, Gilda.
Thank, killed it. Thank you.
Okay. Um, guys, we've got some offers
that have keep showing up. Thank you Jenny.
See them wrong over there. Is there one from your
side? I
Believe there are
Ingrid.
Oh, thank you. I I didn't know when I would've done
for Isha, but then she didn't want it.
But thank you. I do want it, so I'm very grateful.
Thank you. It's kind of worked out.
Okay. That's great.
All right, now we have the New Zealand nurses here.
Steve, Good news for you.
We replen
Great listening.
I've got your attention.
You would've had it regardless,
but welcome to the Health Select Committee.
It's good to have you here. Um, we have you for 10 minutes.
You may leave us time for questions if you want,
but I'll hand that time to you now. Thank you.
Marina ua, uh, UA
and along with me, my colleague, um,
Anne Daniels and Maori Lucas.
So, um, we wanna start by as the voice of Maori nurses,
the New Zealand Nurses Organization.
Uh, we are both a professional union representing over
64,000 nurses and Kai Mahi throughout the country.
NZ o rejects in its entirety the Healthy Futures RA
and member Bill NZ O is committed to TE three CFY tgi
and we believe the voice of Tua should never be silenced.
This government, however, wants to silence the voice
of Maori and render invisible the health needs of Maori.
And we will never let that happen.
The government continues to stoke the racial animosity
for political gain at the expense of Maori.
This starts with the change to the title of the Paya
or Healthy Futures, um, act illustrating the clear intention
to demean the mana of re Maori.
The legislation also repeals the health sector principles
that were designed to give effect to ti ang in health
and attempts to remove any recognition
of the crown's obligation of the principles to Teti.
This reflects the direction of travel that began
with the first act of this government, which disestablished
to akata the Maori Health Authority, whose authority,
whose statutory responsibility was
to give Maori a greater say in their own healthcare.
This was to recognize the of Maori from Article two
of Teti at the Disestablishment ura,
the government suggested that iwi, excuse me,
iwi Maori partnership boards could pick up some
of the leadership and commissioning work.
However, this bill reduces these boards to advisory role
and only at a local level with no access to Ministry
of Health, ministry of Health or Health New Zealand.
These are significant rollbacks of Maori health
and over the past 30 years,
Maori health initiatives have been widely admired
internationally as providing leadership
and promoting innovative indigenous wellbeing using
indigenous approaches.
The original Act 2022 was driven by the findings
of the Y 2 5 75,
the Kopa Maori Health Inquiry into the adequacy
of health services to Maori.
The report found significant breaches of Te Wang
and recommended that the legislative
and policy framework for New Zealand health system recognize
and provide for Treaty of Wang
and its principles as parties
to this inquiry along with others.
It is a travesty that this government seems to undermine
to reverse direction of travel so quickly.
The changes impacting on Maori are mainly contained in
section six that is still titled TE wgi
and contains the preamble in order to provide
for the Crown's intention to give effect to the principles
of the Treaty of Wang.
The bill, however, removes all
of the provisions including health principles built
on TE three TI principles.
NZO is concerned that the removal of the principles
of treaty reflects ongoing work to limit the impact
of TEI in legislation.
And the government has indicated a reactionary direction
of travel that includes this
and other health legislation such
as the Smoke-Free Environments
and Regulated Products Act 1990 and the Mental Health
and Wellbeing Commission Act 2020.
This last cause clause in Section
six removes all the specific mechanisms to achieve these.
It also limits the engagement
to the Hawar Maori Advisory Committee to advice
and the Iwi partnership boards to working locally.
And it sets no structure for them to contribute
to national strategic documents.
This government has systematically dismantled the
infrastructure painstakingly built by Maori
and the health sector to enable Maori to take responsibility
for improving health status.
Maori health services, um, have made gains
for Maori communities, but every game has been fought for.
And to see these gains reversed
by government play in the politics
of racial animosity has been extremely disappointing.
The bill and sought certs Clause 11 A that all nurses
and other employees employed
by Health New Zealand must uphold the public service
principles, political neutrality
and minimum standards of integrity in relation
to these principles, these standards are designs
and codes are designated for public servants
who directly advise ministers
and are involved in the political process as part
of their day-to-day work.
Public servant stance service standards of integrity
and conduct are already covered in the Public
Service Act 2020.
So it's unclear why clause 11 A would need
to be inserted into the Pie Order Act at all.
The bill would likely have a frightening effect on the
rights to freedom of expression
and trying in the Bill of Rights Act 1990, section 14,
preventing nurses and other health workers speaking
up for patient safety.
This would be in direct conflict
with the long hardd professional
and ethical standards that govern nursing
and require the care of patients to be their first concern.
Professional standards
and the requirements to put patients first are critical
to safeguard the public
and central to the trust that patients have.
In nurses. Clause 11 A runs the risk
of nurses being disciplined by their employer
for speaking up for patients.
If the employer considers speaking up
as not in the organization's interest
or could be interpreted
as political rather than a clinical comment.
The amendment bill comes at a time when Health New Zealand
has neglected to provide public reporting on serious adverse
events since 2 20 21,
requiring a direction from the ombudsman
to restart these reports.
This only reflects the deteriorating transparency
and accountability from leadership within the organization,
but also the failure to pay attention to the quality
of care services being delivered
and the failure to understand the role
of open disclosure in making systems safer for patients.
We are opposed to the proposed amendment to the Board
of Health New Zealand, section 12 three.
To deliver equitable health outcomes
for Maori will require expertise in TI
and TE Maori at a board level.
We are also concerned
that the amendment removes requirements for experience
and expertise in public funding
and provisions of services, public sector governance
and government processes and financial management.
This provision should act as a safeguard
to ensure appropriate appointees to govern one
of New Zealand's largest, most complex
and high risk organizations.
The amendment leaves it up to the Minister of Health
to decide whether people are appropriately
skilled for the job.
This leaves the process vulnerable
to appointments based on politics rather than appointments
based on skill to govern
a politically neutral public organization.
Health New Zealand, the health system is
under significant pressure.
The health system costs will continue
to escalate at a rapid pace.
Public health measures are critical
for those in alua New Zealand to enjoy good health
and to reduce the degree
to which health costs will escalate in the long term.
The health sector principles are clearly outlined the role
of public health and achieving piora
as principles encapsulated in the health functions
as health promotion, health prevention, health protection,
and the need to work across government departments
to address these social determinants of disease.
It is critical for all to enjoy good health
as a determinants or causes of poor health tend to sit
outside of the health system.
Repealing the health sector principles weakens the role
that public health plays in the system,
which is not consistent with the purpose
of the PA legislation, which is
to improve the health of all those.
In ua, we are concerned by the removal of the requirements
for public health expertise on the Expert Advisory
Committee on public health.
This could lead to a committee
with no expertise in epidemiology, health intelligence,
health promotion, protection, prevention, and surveillance.
At this point, the committee would cease
to be an expert advisory group on public health
and would no longer be able to fill its for function.
We are opposed to the proposal to repeal clause 53 2,
which would mean that that New Zealand Health
Plan no longer needs to be independently audited
by the auditor General.
It's disappointing that instead
of embracing the Auditor General's independence review
to sustainability
to sustainably improve health policy development,
the Bill team instead tends to propose
to repeal the requirements of the Auditor General to audit
New Zealand Health Plan.
This simply removes yet another layer
of independent scrutiny
and in turn, public accountability for New Zealand.
In conclusion, NZ
and o rejects in its entirety
the Healthy Futures Amendment. Bill,
Welcome. We've
used up a all bit time. Thank you.
Thank you for submission. Almost spot on for time.
Got it.
All right. Next up we have Ruth Sper joining us via Zoom
and just
Good morning.
Good morning Ruth. Very good to have you here. Here.
I'm Sam, chair of the health committee.
We have, uh, members around the table here. We have you for
Five minutes. Five minutes.
So I'll send that to you now. Thank you.
Um, and in that five minutes, I would really like
to concentrate, um, on Clause 11 A.
If this is passed in its present form,
it will prevent health professionals speaking out about
issues of patient care and safety.
I would like to thank all of you sitting around this table.
Wish for a safe public health system.
Everyone believed that was the case
for the National Health Service in the UK until the reality
of what occurred in mids stature Hospital was revealed.
For those of you around the table
who do not know about mids stature, increasingly poor care
resulted in between 400
and 1200 excess deaths over a three year period.
The tragedy is that this was able to occur
because health professionals who were aware of
what was happening, were unable to speak out.
I have spoken with colleagues in mid ture as
to why they didn't speak out
and they commented that they were afraid for their jobs.
The present A SMS contract allowed for senior medical staff
to speak out as long
as they have brought their concerns to management first.
Overall, this has led to a healthy balance
and partnership between clinicians and management,
but with the ability to speak out if management do not take
their concern forward.
Forward. There are clear examples here in New Zealand
of the benefit of health professionals being able
to speak out when management haven't
listened to their concerns.
In 1996, a group of surgeons led by Philip B
and Stuart Goland, both who've been awarded the CNAM,
subsequently documented the actual thefts of a number
of patients which had resulted from poor care due
to systems problems within the organization
because the burdens were able to speak out,
although there were attempts to try to dismiss them.
This led to the newly created position of health
and disability Commissioner undertaking the stent inquiry,
which documented the very significant failings at
Christchurch Hospital as documented in the Lancet.
This led to major improvement in the safe care of patients
in 2003.
We were aware of the very significant risk
to patients' lives when people were being treated in the
corridor on stretches in the overcrowded ed.
We tried hard to work with management
and the board highlighting the issues
and had raised the issue, um, with the Minister of Health
and Prime Minister of the time.
However, it was only when the medical staff both helped
publicly was there any action.
Again, this led to significant improvement in the staffing
of the broad states of Christchurch hospital's, eds
with much improved patient care.
More recent examples of the importance
of health professionals speaking out have been highlighted
with the failings at Nelson Hospitals,
which enabled the Minister of Health
to organize an urgent review when management had failed
to alert into the gravity of the issue.
Any government indeed should be grateful to clinicians
who are willing to speak out about significant patient care
and safety issues, which Health New Zealand is not dealing
with despite clinician having brought
them to their attention.
This gives the government a chance to rectify the issue
before they escalated as they did in the case of Mid Ger
scandal or the Bristol Heart scandal.
And I would urge the select committee to change the bill
to allow all health professionals
to be held publicly about issues that impact on patient care
if they have already brought no concerns
to the attention of management.
Thank you.
Thank you very much. Very good to have you here today.
Thank you for your submission.
Thank you for listening. Have a good day.
Next we have the Cancer Society of New Zealand.
All right, um, welcome. Very good to have you here.
I'm Sam Ow, chair of the Health Committee.
Um, we have you in for 10 minutes.
You may use that time as you wish.
If you want to keep time for questions, you may.
I'll hand that to you now. Thank you.
Thank you. Um, Tina Koto
and thank you for the opportunity to speak today.
I've seen many of you at a lot of events recently.
Death day, November, health Coalition Prevention Summit.
My name is Rachel Newman
and I'm here to speak on behalf of the Cancer Society.
I would also like to acknowledge my colleague who is online,
pan K uh, she's our chief, um, man, man
and Kii Douglas here, who's part of our leadership team.
I want to begin by acknowledging a widely held view
that a healthy population is linked
to a well functioning economy.
When people are well, they're more likely to work,
contribute to society, and support others.
While the relationship between health
and economic growth is complex, there's strong evidence
to suggest that investing in a healthy population can yield
significant social and economic benefits.
Despite progress in cancer care, cancer continues
to place a substantial burden on individuals, families,
the health system, and our society.
The personal cost for someone diagnosed with cancer
can be their life, or if they're lucky,
just a reduction in their health.
Life expectancy.
Treatment itself is not pleasant
and often results in a temporary or permanent loss of income
and financial security.
For some they pay for private or unfunded treatment
or need to travel overseas.
For families, it often means a person needing
to leave their job to provide care.
These are not isolated stories.
They are common and they're costly.
At a societal level, cancer can reduce productivity
in market labor, labor market participation.
Many people never return
to work in the same capacity after treatment.
With some, they might need to rely on income, support,
benefits, disability support, or housing assistance.
We already know that these public systems are under strain
within the house system.
Cancer is one of the most expensive conditions to treat.
This includes cost across medical oncology, radiation,
oncology, surgery, nursing, diagnostics, pharmaceuticals,
which you guys would all know about.
Infrastructure and support and allied house services.
The Cancer Society sees these costs firsthand
and delivering basic enabling services like transport,
accommodation and cancer navigation.
Last year, the Cancer Society
provided 50,000 nights of accommodation for people who need
to travel away from home fort.
Our volunteers drove over 1 million kilometers to get people
to their appointments, and more than 11,000 people benefited
from our support services.
Every day, 74 New Zealanders are diagnosed with cancer.
That's 28,000 people per year.
And this number is expected
to increase significantly by 2014.
The current trajectory for cancer costs is unsustainable
for the health system and it's been driven
by three main factors.
An aging population, which increases overall cancer
incidents, improved survival rates,
which means longer treatment periods
and high cumulative costs,
and rising treatment costs driven by new medicines,
technologies, and the growing need for follow-up care
Prevention is not just a health strategy,
it's an economic one.
If we can delay the onset of cancer
by keeping people healthy until there's 75 instead of 55,
the need for complex
or extended use of expensive hospital care is reduced
and keeps people in more cost effective community
and primary care services.
To change this trajectory,
we must act decisively on prevention.
We know that about 40% of cancers are preventable.
Yet risk factors for cancer such as tobacco, alcohol,
obesity, poor nutrition,
and inactivity remains stubbornly high
and even high for Maori.
Let me give you a few examples.
One in three adults in New Zealand are obese.
However, for Maori, this is one in two,
around one in six
or 720,000 people engage in hazardous drinking.
For Maori, this is closer to one in three
and daily smoking rates overall are down to 6.9%.
However, for Maori,
this rate is 15% more than NA double the national average,
and not even close to our smoke-free target of less than 5%
for all populations.
These are not just lifestyle choices.
The statistics for Maori are the result of
systemic inequities, poverty, racism,
and the legacy of colonization.
And that's why t and equity must remain
central to our health system.
The Cancer Society does not support the removal
of equity principles from the PI Water Healthy Future Act.
These principles are essential
to addressing persistent health inequities.
The Cancer Society opposed the proposed amendment
that removes the requirement for Health New Zealand
to maintain systems and processes to uphold tei.
These systems are foundational.
Their removal undermines the crown's commitment
to Titi and risks.
Further marginalizing communities already
facing barriers to healthcare.
The Cancer Society oppose the amendment
to remove the requirement for Health Museum to engage
with Iwi Maori partnership boards.
These boards ensure that services are culturally responsive,
locally informed, and aligned with.
We are also concerned about the current focus on the
narrowly defined health targets.
We call for BI and prevention targets relating to tobacco,
alcohol, uv, radiation,
and obesity to be included in the ACT
and more rigorous policy action to achieve.
The Cancer Society does not support the removal
of specifications for Health New Zealand board
and the Public Health Expert Advisory Committee.
These specifications ensure
that the governance reflects the diversity
of the communities, the needs of our health system,
and upholds our obligations.
These are not just policy positions.
They act critical to ensure our health system is inclusive,
effective, and responsible
for the people impacted by cancer.
So in summary, the Cancer Society
of New Zealand does not support the proposed
amendments to this act.
Thank you very much. Uh, Dr.
Vero, thanks for your presentation.
The, um, uh, removing, uh,
of, um, health system principles
that support prevention.
Can you please describe how prevention can play a,
a role in addressing, uh, the challenges
that New Zealand's New Zealanders are having accessing
cancer services in the, in the long term?
Sorry, can you clarify how prevention,
how prevention addresses demand in the long
term for health services?
Yeah, so to,
for prevention, prevention of the long term would,
so an example if we brought in a prevention, um,
policy such as removing exposure
to junk food for children.
Um, and we saw in the news just a couple of weeks ago,
research released that show that children are exposed
to junk food advertising 76 times a day
that would reduce over the course of a child's lifetime,
their kind of exposure
and want to consume junk food
that we know is really high in, um, energy
and lots of nutrients, um, that aren't good
for health in the long term, whether it's heart disease,
diabetes, stroke, cancer.
Um, and that would lead to
be one mechanism for reducing long-term obesity.
'cause we know for adults
that actually reducing obesity is really challenging.
But when you think about children,
you've actually got this opportunity
to intervene on children as they grow up
and become healthier adults in the long term.
If somebody's not obese, it means
that we don't need health systems that have
to manage a high number of obese people.
And there's lots of mechanisms within the health system,
even like bed lifts that are important for people to, um,
engage in having surgery
or a lot of people can't get surgery due to their health,
um, before their surgery.
And so that's just one example where a small change now
would lead to a long-term change in our health system.
And that would be one of many changes.
And we are really just looking for progress here.
Um, and these small changes
and incremental changes over time.
Thank you. We're, we're over time.
Thank you for your presentation with Mercy today.
Okay. That brings us to the Public Service Association.
Is that online? It's not stated. They're online. Sorry.
They're online. Okay. They would be joining us.
Yeah. 20 minutes.
Hello Sarah. Uh, good to have you here.
I'm Sam Dale, chair of the Health Committee.
We have members around the table here.
We have you for 15 minutes today to,
uh, make your submission.
You may use all that time
or save some time for questions if you wish.
Hello as well. Ashok. Good to have you here.
I will hand that time to you now. Thank you
Hira. Um,
I'm Coursera Perry Koua.
I'm one of the national lead organizers
for the Public Service Association
and I'm with my colleague Ashok San Shanka from, uh,
national Sector Leader in our health team as well.
Um, we are speaking today on behalf of the PSA.
We represent over 30,000 health workers.
We have members in all four crown entities governed
by the act, health, New Zealand Farm Act, New Zealand Blood
and Organ Service, and the Health Quality
and Safety Commission, as well
as other organizations in the funded health sector.
The health system in ARO is entering a period
of transformation as we implement piora Healthy Futures.
The vision of a reform system where people live longer
and good health have improved quality of life,
and there is equity between all groups.
Um, we are wanting to build a healthcare system
that works collectively
and cohesively around a shared set of values
and a culture that enables everyone to bring their best
to their work and feel proud when they go home
to their whanau, their friends and their community.
These reforms were expected to achieve five system shifts,
which were the health system reinforcing TE principles
and obligations or people able
to access a comprehensive range
of support in their local communities
to help them stay well.
Everyone have an equal access
to high quality emergency services
and specialist care when they need it.
Digital services
that provide more people the care they need in their homes
and in their community and health and care workers.
Importantly, being valued
and well-trained for the future health system.
PSA members want to work for a health system
that is fully funded and listens to workers' voices
so they can deliver the care that people need.
We are committed to health equity in ensuring the health
system honors take to 80
and this bill is a step away from that vision.
The PSA supports Ma Iwi Maori partnership boards,
the Health Sector Principles,
and Tim Mari, we are very concerned
that this bill is another attack on MA knowledge
and expertise in the health system.
And coming on the back of the disestablishment
of Akaka Fiora, the PSA opposes this bill
and recommends it does not proceed.
In this oral submission, we are going
to focus on two aspects of the bill, the repeal
of the health charter and changes to health bargaining.
And I hand over to my colleague Ash Sanka.
You honor everybody and, uh, thank you
for giving us the opportunity to present to you.
Uh, I wanted to raise some concerns that we have in relation
to Section 65 A of the bill.
Uh, this bill will give minister the power
to direct Health New Zealand to delegate bargaining
to the Public Service Commissioner.
It is our concern is
that this approach removes from discussions about
employment, uh, from health system
and to health system, to an organization
that has no expertise in health.
Health, as you would all appreciate,
is a very complex organization with over 90,000 employees
who work in various work, uh, who are in various, um,
different workforces, uh, and occupations.
There are a number of different unions, uh,
and organizations that, um,
are involved in collective bargaining within health.
And, um, it requires quite, uh,
a a different approach that
that may be used in the public service to
how you would bargain in health.
Um, and so our concern really is that if, um,
the Public service commissioner is handed over the
bargaining of this, um, of, of health that uh,
there may not be the expertise, uh,
and experience that is required for this bargaining.
As you would already notice,
bargaining in health is quite a, uh, quite difficult.
Um, we aren't, uh,
we normally do get involved in quite intense,
uh, negotiations.
And while a lot of the, um, a lot of concentration, um,
that you may see in the media
and other places are around bargaining happens
to be our money that is not necessarily most of the issues
that we bargain about.
Most of our time in bargaining is spent about trying
to solve problems, uh, within the workplace
and within the workforce that are very complex.
Some of these examples would be that vast majority
of our time in bargaining is spent looking at
how workloads are managed
and how people can continue to do the good work
that they need to do to provide the best patient care that,
um, that they can provide.
And it is our concern that if, uh, people
with no expertise in health become involved in bargaining,
that we would begin to lose these sorts of processes.
There are many examples where through bargaining,
we have put in place good processes, uh,
that delivers much better healthcare to, um, our, uh,
to, to our community.
And, um, and it would be a,
and as I said, it'd be a huge loss if if this kind
of engagement, um, wa was lost.
Like we have, um, had a number of processes
that we have agreed with, uh, health NZ in terms of
how we redesign work so that, um,
we can provide more efficient services to our, uh, to,
to patients and also create more
interesting work for our members.
Uh, these are very important aspects of
what is involved in bargaining
and we don't want to see these matters getting lost.
Uh, so we recommend that
the health bargaining should remain within the ambit
of Health New Zealand rather than being handed
over to the commissioner.
Thank you.
Thank you very much. Sorry sir. Thank you. Yes, sir.
I'm just gonna go to the health charter to Mario Rono.
The, to Mario Rono is a commitment to the health system
to health workers to ensure a better way
of working within the health system.
It was co-designed with health workers
and Health New Zealand following extension conversation
with a wide range of organizations,
including Iwi Mary providers.
It was thousands of conversations over two years
of listening to the health workforce
and ensuring everyone across the health sector understood
they have a responsibility to themselves, their teams,
each other, and the communities they serve.
The charter is a guided document.
It sets out the values and principles that shape behaviors.
It provides a foundation for
how health workers will provide care that is more responsive
and accessible for all people across the health system.
It supports transformative change and provided hope
and optimism to a workforce that is already tired
and burnt out from an underfunded health system
that has endured relentless change.
Now more than ever the charter is needed.
Repealing it would be a huge backward step.
The charter supports
and promotes a safe working culture
across a whole health sector.
We do not understand what the Minister of Health referred
to in his reason to repeal this guide
and document as red tape caring for the people
that provide care for the public can only bring better
patient outcomes and productivity gains.
One of the strengths of this charter was
that it was a joined up approach
for the whole of the health system.
It did not just cover workers and crown entities,
but in the funded sector as well.
At the moment, there is a disconnect
between the funded sector and Health New Zealand.
This disconnect creates problems for workers and patients.
And the health charter was a framework
for addressing this disconnect
and provide more opportunities for better healthcare
for all health workers.
Working conditions are the conditions for the care
that patients receive.
The health charter can only improve the health system
and removing it will have an impact on patients
to Mario Rono with a guiding document
that provides this at the heart of where patients
and communities receive their care.
Who wouldn't want a culture
where workplaces are physiologically, physically, mentally,
and culturally safe?
Where is the red tape?
This bill removes mechanisms like the Eby Maori partnership
boards to Mario Rono
and health work, her bargaining
that would improve the health system
and the care patients receive.
We re recommend that this bill does not proceed.
Thank you for your time.
Thank you.
Uh, sure.
Very Yeah. Thanks, um, very much
for your, for your submission.
The health charter has been described by the minister
as red tape.
Can you please, um, explain if the health,
uh, if the health charter is used, uh, in, um,
bargaining or if the health charter has been used
to stop any of the restructuring that has happened under,
under this government?
Uh, and if not, uh, can you explain
what you think the purpose of the health charter is?
Thank you, aia. Um, I think,
and to stay straight away, the,
the chapter is already in use.
We have it embedded in leadership development programs
to try and improve the culture at awa.
Right now we have it in our health workforce plan.
We have it in our job descriptions.
We have it in respect at work
and where we're trying to reduce, um,
unprofessional behaviors, bullying behaviors.
Um, we do use it in our bargaining.
It's, we use it around, um,
when we've put our claims together, we've made sure
that everything is, um, tailored to those as well.
Um, particularly the for power of the charter.
Um, it is essentially the purpose was
to actually transform the culture in our health system.
I think everybody will be aware.
Um, if you look at bullying just as one example,
I think health is probably in the top three consistently
for the most, um, places of bullion, um, went to far,
became one entity.
And we, and it got restructured.
The whole focus was we need to transform the culture.
We need to work differently.
We need to do better for our patients,
and we need to do better for our workers
and make sure they're recognized and valued.
This charter was actually drafted from the workforce.
Workers did have hope
and optimism that they were being listened to.
They were able to help create what would be,
what could make transformative change.
Um, so we are actually appalled
that we would wanna remove this.
We don't see where any red tape is
because why would you not wanna
supportive workplace culture?
Um, it does impact patients.
If you can imagine somebody who's being bullied,
who doesn't feel they can speak out appropriately,
how are they delivering the best care that they can?
If they're in that environment,
that's when mistakes are made because they can't speak out
and they don't feel safe and they don't feel recognized.
And you'll see right now at the moment,
our health workforce is not feeling valued
and not feeling recognized.
And this is a big piece of work
that would've helped promote that.
Thank you Sarah. Um, we're over time,
but thank you to you both
for your submission to the committee today. Thank you
Everybody.
Uh, Next
and final submission is from the Medical
Council of New Zealand.
Welcome to the Health Committee. It's good to have you here.
Uh, we have for you for 10 minutes.
You may use all that time. Save some questions if you wish.
I'll hand that to you now. Thank you.
Dana Koto. My name is Simon Watt.
I'm the Deputy chair of the Medical Council
and a layperson member and with me
Chito called Joan Simian.
I'm the CEO of or the Medical Council of New Zealand.
Uh, 10.
I'm the deputy CEO of the Medical Council.
Thank you for the opportunity
to provide a submission on the Healthy Futures
Prior Order Amendment.
Bill. We're here to speak to the submission
of the Medical Council
of New Zealand Council is the regulator
for the medical profession.
I understand our written submission should be taken as read.
So this oral submission is intended
to ensure the select committee is clear about
how the Medical Council's submission is connected
with its role to protect public safety
and how one aspect of the bill could impact this.
Our submission relates solely to clause 16 of the bill.
As you know, that clause removes the requirement
to ensure Health New Zealand maintains systems
and processes to ensure it has the capacity
and capability to understand the Treaty of wgi
culturally appropriate health services
for Maori grounded in Maori knowledge
and customs that are whanau centered Maori perspectives
of services and more broadly cultural safety
and responsiveness of services for patients of any culture
or ethnicity.
The reason we have an interest in clause 16 of the bill is
because the medical Council's primary purpose is
to protect the public.
Two important ways it does that are to set standards for
how doctors are trained and the way they practice medicine.
These standards require doctors to develop skills
and understanding of cultural competence
and cultural safety in, in the New Zealand context,
given our history, population makeup
and inequities and health outcomes.
At a practical level, it makes sense for doctors
to be trained to have the skills
and understanding to provide health services in a way
that is culturally safe for Maori.
But this is not exclusive.
The medical council set standards
to ensure doctors are culturally competent
and safe to treat patients of all cultures and ethnicities.
The section of the act, which Clause 16
of the bill is amending, aligns with
and supports what the medical Council does in this area.
Since Health New Zealand employs around half
of the doctors in New Zealand, removing this requirement,
undercuts council's efforts to promote a consistent standard
of health care throughout New Zealand.
And just to be clear about the statutory requirement,
which Clause 16 is removing,
it's about health New Zealand having systems, processes,
capabilities, and capacity for cultural safety.
When providing health services to Maori
and all other patients.
It's not about providing different health services
or different treatment based on ethnicity
Against this background
and underlying our concern
with the proposed amendment is Council's view
that cultural safety is integral to effective clinical care.
Cultural safety is focused on creating an environment
where people from diverse cultural backgrounds feel
respected, safe and empowered.
There is a growing body of evidence that culturally safe
practices lead to improved health outcomes, particularly
for marginalized or underserved communities.
Cultural biases and assumptions can impact a
doctor's consultation.
They may influence how thorough a doctor is in their
assessment of the patient, the tests or treatment offered,
or whether a patient feels comfortable
approaching their doctor to access health services.
To look at a New Zealand example,
Maori women have been significantly less likely than
New Zealand, European women
to access breast screening services.
A 2015 study of breast cancer patients showed
that Maori women who were not screened had a 60% higher
likelihood of dying from breast cancer than non-Maori women.
But the study also found there was no significant difference
in survival rates between Maori
and non-Maori women where they had
access screening services.
These differences highlight while providing a culturally
safe environment for accessing health services.
In this case, breast screening can overcome significant
health inequities while making the same services available
to all cultural and ethnic groups.
Therefore, it's important that our largest employer
of doctors and health professionals should support its
employees to understand how
to provide care in a culturally safe manner that
that enables equal access to health services.
The council's further concerns
with the amendment are set out in our written submission.
But briefly, these include that first,
despite the council's setting, continuing to set standards
for cultural safety and competence.
And future doctors are less likely
to be working alongside other staff at Health New Zealand
who are culturally competent.
So the work environment overall will be less conducive
for patients of all ethnicities
to access culturally sound care,
which would negatively impact health outcomes over time.
Second, it will limit health.
New Zealand's ability to support overseas trained doctors
to settle into work
and deliver healthcare in a way
that is effective in the New Zealand environment.
These doctors are a key part of our workforce, yet 40% leave
after one year and 60% after two years in New Zealand.
Removing the requirement for Health New Zealand
to maintain capability
and cultural safety would be a backward step in retaining
overseas trained doctors in our medical workforce.
Third, it will diminish health New Zealand's incentive
to provide doctors with further education
and resources to ensure workplace systems support them
to deliver culturally safe care.
Fourth, it may increase the risk of avoidable harm
to patients and their families
by reinforcing a clinical culture
that doesn't support a patient's unique requirements
and patient-centered care.
And finally, there is a trans Tasman dimension.
Australia has made great strides in embedding cultural
safety in medical education and practice.
We share key medical training structures
and processes with the Australian health regulators,
which support patient-centered care New Zealand would drop
behind and fall out of alignment with Australia.
If we backtrack on cultural safety in our health system
for all of these reasons, the medical council would
encourage the select committee to consider
how enacting Clause 16 will negatively impact not just
Maori, but all underserved populations such
as immigrant communities, Pacifica,
or those patients with disabilities.
Removing legislative emphasis on cultural safety risks,
perpetuating health inequities, as well
as reducing the opportunity for tailored
and appropriate patient care for all New Zealanders.
Thank you.
I don't agree with this bill,
but I suppose one might have a view that, uh,
good care can be delivered that is not culturally sensitive.
Could you please, uh, explain whether, uh,
how cultural sensitivity is
or is not part of good medical practice?
Cultural safety is about providing care that is, um,
specific to that person's needs no matter who the person is.
So if you're providing culturally safe care,
then it's respecting that person what they need,
and the outcomes going to be better for that person.
But often cultural safety is connected with care for Maori,
but what we've, what the research has demonstrated is what's
good for Maori is good for all patients.
So done.
Thank you. Oh no,
that was great. That was awesome. Alright.
Thank you very much for your submission today.
Appreciate you making your time. Come. Thank you.